index.md, before:

---
title: Gabe Busto
layout: page
---

## quick intro
i'm gabe, and i'm a builder at heart with a highly generalized skill set. over the last six months, i developed a deep interest in becoming something like an applied ai engineer or research engineer after building and launching what i would consider my first "real" ai product.

i basically want to be able to take my builder skills + mindset, and focus my time and energy on building really cool, novel, and actually useful ai products and tools. i'm working on building up my foundational knowledge and skills, because i don't want to have any major limitations. e.g. if i need to take a research paper with no code and implement what they found (assuming its complete enough to do so), i want to be able to do that. this is what i'm working towards.


## currently working on:
- reading [*neural networks from scratch*](https://nnfs.io/); on chapter 5 at the moment

- improving blocksmithai.com:
    - improving model generation; don't have a ton of raw data, so exploring fine tuning options vs a simple rag-like approach to pull exemplars from different model classes
    - improving blocksmith texturing
        - one option is to update mv-adapter to use sd3.5 instead of sdxl. sd3.5 is just so much better
        - another option is to figure out how to fine tune / train mv-adapter to have a fixed understanding of north/south/east/west. untextured block models are vague, and it's hard to know what side is actually the front or back of a model. if i could find someway for it to understand one camera angle as "front" or north consistently, it could solve a lot of headaches.
        - if i can get sd3.5 working with mv-adapter, create a fine-tuned version for outputting minecraft/hytopia style game asset concept images
    - updating blocksmith ux to more of a workflow than a conveyer belt
        - work in a single ui view where you can generate a concept image, use that to generate a model, edit via prompt, then texture
            - this type of ux is what's necessary to make it a good experience to add animation support finally

- looking to join a company working with ai in some capacity; ideally as an applied ai engineer or ai research engineer type role


## projects / apps
[see my projects and apps](./projects.md)


### game building experience
[see games i've built](./games.md)


## previous work experience
[see my work experience](./experience.md)

Commit message:

updated the site and the blocksmith writeup page some more

index.md, after:

---
title: Gabe Busto
layout: page
---

## quick intro
i'm gabe, and i'm a builder at heart with a highly generalized skill set. over the last six months, i developed a deep interest in becoming something like an applied ai engineer or research engineer after building and launching what i would consider my first "real" ai product. see the technical writeup for it [here](./blocksmithai.md).

i basically want to be able to take my builder skills + mindset, and focus my time and energy on building really cool, novel, and actually useful ai products and tools. i'm working on building up my foundational knowledge and skills, because i don't want to have any major limitations. e.g. if i need to take a research paper with no code and implement what they found (assuming its complete enough to do so), i want to be able to do that. this is what i'm working towards.


## currently working on:
- reading [*neural networks from scratch*](https://nnfs.io/); on chapter 5 at the moment

- improving blocksmithai.com:
    - improving model generation; don't have a ton of raw data, so exploring fine tuning options vs a simple rag-like approach to pull exemplars from different model classes
    - improving blocksmith texturing
        - one option is to update mv-adapter to use sd3.5 instead of sdxl. sd3.5 is just so much better
        - another option is to figure out how to fine tune / train mv-adapter to have a fixed understanding of north/south/east/west. untextured block models are vague, and it's hard to know what side is actually the front or back of a model. if i could find someway for it to understand one camera angle as "front" or north consistently, it could solve a lot of headaches.
        - if i can get sd3.5 working with mv-adapter, create a fine-tuned version for outputting minecraft/hytopia style game asset concept images
    - updating blocksmith ux to more of a workflow than a conveyer belt
        - work in a single ui view where you can generate a concept image, use that to generate a model, edit via prompt, then texture
            - this type of ux is what's necessary to make it a good experience to add animation support finally

- looking to join a company working with ai in some capacity; ideally as an applied ai engineer or ai research engineer type role


## projects / apps
[see my projects and apps](./projects.md)


### game building experience
[see games i've built](./games.md)


## previous work experience
[see my work experience](./experience.md)
